Why I fight,
run,
or shut down
understanding survival responses.
Sometimes
I don't react the way you expect me to.
You might ask me something simple
and I snap back
or I walk away,
or I just go quiet and stop responding.
From the outside
it can look like I'm being difficult
or ignoring you
or choosing not to engage,
but that's not what's happening.
What you're seeing.
Is my body trying to protect me?
There are times when something inside me suddenly feels unsafe.
It might be something small,
a tone of voice,
a look,
a situation that feels familiar.
You might not notice it,
but I do.
And before I've had time to think about it,
my body reacts.
That's when I go into what people call fight,
flight,
or freeze.
If I go into fight,
you'll see anger.
I might shout,
swear,
push boundaries,
or challenge you.
It can look like I'm being aggressive,
like I'm trying to take control,
but what's really happening
is I feel under threat and my body is trying to defend me.
If I go into flight.
I might leave the room,
refuse to engage,
or avoid you completely.
It might look like I don't care,
like I'm walking away from responsibility,
but I'm not.
I'm trying to get away from something that feels too much,
and then there's freeze.
That's when I shut down.
I go quiet.
I stop talking.
Sometimes I don't respond at all.
It might look like I'm being rude
or ignoring you on purpose,
but inside.
I'm overwhelmed.
It's like everything just stops in those moments.
I'm not thinking clearly.
The part of my brain that helps me understand,
process,
and respond,
it's not fully there.
My body has taken over,
and once that happens,
I can't just switch it off because someone tells me to calm down.
That's not how it works.
This is why your response matters so much,
because when I'm in that state,
I'm not choosing behavior.
I'm reacting to how safe or unsafe I feel.
If voices get louder,
if I feel cornered,
if things become unpredictable,
my brain reads that as more danger,
and everything escalates.
But when you stay calm,
even when I'm not.
When your voice stays steady,
when you give me space instead of closing in,
when you don't take it personally,
something changes.
My body starts to feel less under threat.
It doesn't happen instantly,
but it starts.
That's what helps me come out of it.
That's what helps me regulate
over time.
That's how I learn a different way of responding.
Not through punishment,
not through control,
but through feeling safe enough to think again.
I'm not expecting you to get it right every time,
but what I need
is consistency.
I need to know what to expect from you.
I need to know that even when I react,
you're not going to react in a way that makes things worse,
because behind my behavior
is a system that's learned to survive.
And when you understand that you,
you don't just see behavior,
you see what's driving it,
and that changes everything.